In this lecture, you'll learn about VLAN trunk ports. We covered access ports in the previous lecture.
You saw in the example lab topology, we had a switch with some Engineering and some Sales PCs plugged in,
which are in different IP subnets at Layer 3.
We also put them into different VLANs at Layer 2 and that segmented the broadcast domains at both Layer 2
and Layer 3, giving us better performance and better security.
But what about the links between switches?
So that previous example, we just had one switch there.
The example here now is similar,
we've got our Engineering PCs, our Sales PCs, and a router to route traffic between them, but they're
not all plugged in to the same switch.
We've got multiple switches here.
So if you look at ENG PC1, if I also had another Engineering PC plugged into that same switch, they
would be able to communicate with each other.
But the problem is that right now, all of my links between my switches are on the default VLAN 1.
So PCs in the same VLAN on the same switch can talk to each other, but they can't communicate with
other PCs on another switch, even if that was in the same VLAN.
So what we could do to help with this, we could configure those links between switches.
We could put them in the Engineering VLAN, for example,
and great!
Now, all of our Engineering PCs can communicate with each other no matter what switch they're on.
But the problem is that the Sales PCs still can't talk to each other.
So we need PCs in different VLANs to be able to talk with each other across different switches,
and the way we do that is by configuring a trunk port.
The protocol which used for our trunking is Dot1Q.
So on the links between switches, rather than configuring them as an access port which can only carry traffic
for one VLAN, we configured them as a trunk port which will carry traffic for all of our VLANs.
So, an access port carries traffic for one specific VLAN. Dot1Q trunks are configured on the
links between switches where we need to carry traffic for multiple VLANs. The old or one of the
old protocols that was available to do this was ISL, Inter-Switch Link.
That was a Cisco proprietary trunking protocol, which is now obsolete.
The industry is standardized always on using Dot1Q now. The way that Dot1Q works, when this
switch forwards traffic to another switch over a trunk port, it tags the Layer 2 Dot1Q
header with the correct VLAN.
So in the packet, we've got the layer 2 header in there, and it inserts into the Layer 2 header the VLAN
information.
The receiving switch will only forward the traffic out ports that are in that VLAN, snd when the switch sends the
traffic to an end host, it removes the Dot1Q VLAN tag because our end hosts are not VLAN-aware.
They don't need to see that tag, it confuse them.
This is how the format of the Ethernet frame looks. Up at the top there,
there's a standard Ethernet frame that comes into the switch from the host.
When the switch sends out a trunk port to another switch, it will insert the Dot1Q tag into the header
stating which VLAN this traffic is for,
and again, it removes it at the other end when it sends out to an end hosts.
So let's look at how this works,
I'm going to look at some broadcast traffic. So the Sales PC2 down in the bottom left corner,
it sends out some broadcast traffic. That hits it's
switch, Switch1.
There's no other Sales PCs on there, so it doesn't send it to any other end hosts,
but Switch1 is configured with a trunk port going up to Switch2,
so it will send the traffic up to Switch2.
When it does that, it's going over a trunk port so it will insert the VLAN information into the Layer 2
header. It says, this traffic is for the Sales VLAN.
It comes into Switch2, and it sees it's got the Engineering PC on there, but it's in the Engineering
VLAN, so it knows the traffic is not for it.
It doesn't send it there.
It does have a trunk port,
so it sends up the trunk port to Switch3 again. It puts on the Dot1Q tag saying this is for the
Sales VLAN. On Switch3,
we do have an end host in the Sales VLAN,
it's the router.
The port connected to the router is configured as an access port in the Sales VLAN. So, the switch
will send the traffic up to the router.
When it does that, it's going up an access port, so it strips off the Dot1Q tag. Switch3 is also
connected to Switch4 with a trunk port, so it will send the traffic down there. Again,
it will tag with the Dot1Q tag, saying it's for the Sales VLAN. When it comes in to Switch4, it's
also got an end host configured with an access port in the Sales VLAN,
so it will send the traffic out there to Sales PC1, strips off the Dot1Q header when it sends it
down to switch 5. That is again on a trunk port, so it will save
that this is for the Sales VLAN.
Okay, so that is how our Dot1Q trunks work.
Now, just a little aside here, you don't need to know this for the CCNA exam, but you're going
to run into this in the real-world,
so I wanted to mention it here as well.
Your end hosts, like your normal desktop PCs, are typically members of only one VLAN and they're not VLAN aware.
So for those hosts, this switch is configured as an access port.
But a special case of end hosts is virtualized hosts, like VMware or Microsoft HyperV, where there's
virtual machines in different IP subnets on the host. So that one host, that's maybe running a virtual
machine for Engineering,
it's also running a virtual machine for Sales.
So in that case, you need to trunk the VLANs down to that host so it knows which virtual machine to
send the traffic to.
So you can see the example here,
I've got a VMware host in the example.
It's got virtual machines for both Sales and for Engineering.
We've got one physical port on the Ethernet switch, interface fastEthernet0/1 here.
We configure that as a trunk port, rather than as an access port.
Okay, so where you've got normal end hosts, like a normal desktop PC or a
normal server which is running just one application on there, you configure your switch as access ports.
When you've got ports going to another switch, you configure that as a trunk.
When you've got a virtualized host, like a VMware host, that is also configured as a trunk.
Another special use case is IP phones.
When you're using IP phones, the switch is physically connected to the IP phone and then the PC is
plugged in to the back of the phone for that particular user.
The benefit that you get from this is it only uses up one physical port on your switch. So you don't
have the phone and the PC both plugged into two different ports on the switch,
you have the phone plugged into the switch and then the PC plugged into the back of the phone.
Now, with this, we want to be able to segregate our phone calls from our data traffic, but they're
both going through the same cable here.
The reason that we want to have them separate is that we need to give different treatment to the
voice traffic.
We need to have that prioritized because it's very sensitive to delay,
and the other reason is for security as well.
We don't want our voice, our phone calls, and our data traffic in the same IP subnet in the same VLAN,
because that would make it easier for somebody to sniff that traffic and listen in to our phone calls.
So we're going to have our voice traffic, our actual phone calls, and our data traffic on our PC,
we're going to have those in different IP subnet and in different VLANs,
and you can see here that they're both going through the same physical cable from the switch to the IP
phone.
So we need to configure that as a trunk port, which is going to carry the voice
VLAN traffic and the data VLAN traffic.
Alright,
let's have a look at how to actually configure this very simple configuration.
So the example here, interface fastEthernet0/24, is connected to another switch.
Optionally, I can put in a description and I've said 'description Trunk to SW2'. Then, the trunking
commands I say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q' and 'switchport mode trunk'. Now, with the
'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q' command, modern switches only support Dot1Q.
So if you put this command in, then it will give you an error message saying it doesn't understand
the command. Older switches support both ISL and Dot1Q, so on older switches,
you have to say 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q',
because they'll default to ISL but we always use Dot1Q.
On modern switches,
there's no need to put that command in. If you put the command in and it gives you an error message,
it's okay, no harm done.
Okay, so that's how we manually configure a port as a trunk port. I would need to configure this on the
other side, on the other switch as well.
So that's how we do the configuration on a switchport, which is connected to another switch or to a
virtualized host such as VMware. Another configuration to show you here is the special configuration
where the switchport is plugged into an IP phone with a PC connected in behind that.
The configuration here is, for example, 'interface FastEthernet 0/10'.
I've said 'description IP Phone', and this port is going to act as a trunk port. It is going to be sending
traffic for multiple VLANs, for the voice VLAN and for the data VLAN, down to the phone.
But we don't configure it as 'switchport mode trunk',
we configure it as 'switchport mode access'. So it is actually a trunk port, but you configure 'switchport mode access'.
It's a special case where we've got an IP phone plugged in.
Then we say 'switchport access vlan 10', that is our data VLAN, and then 'switchport voice vlan 20',
here is where you configure the voice VLAN.
When you've got a Cisco IP phone plugged into a Cisco switch, the switch will detect that it is an IP phone,
and it knows
they both talk to each other.
They know that this is the VLAN for the PC and this is the VLAN for the voice traffic on the phone.
Last thing to tell you here is about the Native VLAN.
The switch needs to know which VLAN to assign any traffic to, which comes in untagged on a trunk port.
That used to be required for when a switch was connected to a hub.
Hubs are long gone though, you can't even buy hubs anymore. Hubs were Layer 1 devices, so not VLAN
aware.
So, that's why we have the Native VLAN there to support hubs.
The default Native VLAN is VLAN 1, but there are some security issues with using VLAN 1 as the Native
VLAN. There's some known attacks that can exploit that,
so best practice is to change it to an unused VLAN.
The Native VLAN must match on both sides of a trunk, so on both switches that are connected to each
other, for the trunk to come up.
So looking at the full config for our trunk, including setting the Native VLAN, we need to create
a VLAN for this first.
So I've said 'vlan 199', 'name Native'.
This is a dedicated VLAN that is not going to be used for anything else and you're not going to have any
end hosts actually using this VLAN. Then, on my port that's connected to the other switch, I've got
'interface GigabitEthernet 0/1', 'description Trunk to SW2', 'switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q',
'switchport mode trunk',
so the same commands we covered just a minute ago, and then
'switchport trunk native vlan 199'.
On the switch on the other side, I put in exactly the same configuration. To verify this,
we use the command 'show interface gig0/1 switchport' and here, I can see that the operational
mode is it's a trunk port.
The encapsulation being used is Dot1Q,
and the Native VLAN 199. It's saying inactive just because we don't have any access ports
configured in VLAN 199.
That's good,
that's the way that we should configure it.
The last thing that I want to tell you about here is limiting allowed VLANs and similarly to changing
the Native VLAN, this is done mainly for security reasons, but it also improves performance as well.
So you can see in the diagram here on the bottom switch, I've got PCs in the ENG, SALES, and ACCOUNTS
VLAN. But on the top switch,
there's only PCs for ENG and ACCOUNTS.
No SALES PCs on that top switch.
So there's no point in sending SALES traffic up to that top switch,
and if we did, it would take up bandwidth which would decrease performance, and also, it could be a security
concern.
We don't want to send traffic anywhere where it's not actually required. So to prevent that from
happening, on the bottom switch, actually, on both switches on that inter-switch link between the two
switches, we can configure the allowed VLANs list. So in the example here, we would allow traffic for
the ENG and ACCOUNTS
VLAN, but we're not going to send traffic for the SALES VLAN over that link.
So the way that we configure it is go to the interface, which is a trunk, interface GigabitEthernet 0/1
for this example, and the command
'switchport trunk allowed vlan 10,30'.
If you don't use this command, then all VLANs that are configured on the switch will
be sent over link.
By doing this, you limit it to only the VLANs that are required.
Okay, that was the last thing for trunking.
See you in the next lecture,
where we'll do it with a lab demo.